[DEP-07]: Introduce scale-down support (#1355)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/proposals/07-scale-down.md

      - [Post-scale-down reconciliation](#post-scale-down-reconciliation)
    - [Anti-Rejoin Detection in backup-restore](#anti-rejoin-detection-in-backup-restore)
      - [Detection via boltdb bucket](#detection-via-boltdb-bucket)
      - [Detection flow](#detection-flow)
    - [Failures and Recovery Strategy](#failures-and-recovery-strategy)
  - [Use Cases](#use-cases)
    - [Typical Scale-Down](#typical-scale-down)
    - [Scale-Down after Live Migration (BootstrapWithExistingCluster)](#scale-down-after-live-migration-bootstrapwithexistingcluster)
  - [Unified Scale-Down Sequence](#unified-scale-down-sequence)
  - [Compatibility](#compatibility)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [HTTP Endpoint on backup-restore](#http-endpoint-on-backup-restore)
  - [References](#references)

---

## Summary

etcd-druid can scale up an etcd cluster but **does not yet support scaling it down**. Since there is no coordinated mechanism to remove etcd members before terminating their pods, a CEL validation rule on `spec.replicas` prevents any decrease — only increases or scale-to-zero (hibernation) are permitted.

This DEP introduces scale-down support by:

> 1. Implementing member removal via a `RemoveMembers` [EtcdOpsTask][DEP-05] that removes etcd members from the cluster **before** the desired member set is reduced in the reconciled resources.

Reviewer: IMO, you shouldn't mention the implementation(which yet to be discussed) details in summary.

> 1. Adding a member removal detection mechanism in `etcd-backup-restore` to prevent removed members from re-joining.

Reviewer: same as above + one more point:
If member is already removed from cluster then there is no need of preventing a member from re-joining it, because they can't re-joins the cluster as long as its data-dir is intact ... right or Am I missing something.

1. Removing the CEL validation that blocks decreasing `spec.replicas` once member removal is coordinated in the reconciliation flow.

Scale-down is the symmetric counterpart to [DEP-03]. Where DEP-03 adds members as learners before increasing the desired member set, this DEP removes members from etcd before decreasing the desired member set.

---

## Terminology

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **backup-restore** | The `etcd-backup-restore` container running alongside etcd in each member pod, responsible for snapshots, restoration, and initialization. |

> | **etcdbrctl** | The CLI binary provided by `etcd-backup-restore`, used for out-of-band operations (compact, restore, snapshot, copy, and — with this DEP — member-remove). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **etcdbrctl** | The CLI binary provided by `etcd-backup-restore` supports several sub-commands like compact, server, restore, snapshot, copy for different use-cases. |
```
reason same as above, just define `terminology` used, not other details.

| **EtcdOpsTask** | A custom resource ([DEP-05]) representing an out-of-band operator task on an etcd cluster. |
| **PreSync** | A reconciler phase that executes before Sync (resource creation/update). Operations here must complete before cluster configuration changes take effect. Defined in the [`Operator` interface][OperatorInterface]. |
| **Bootstrap with existing cluster** | A mode where new Etcd CR members join an already-running etcd cluster managed by a different Etcd CR. Configured via `spec.etcd.bootstrapWithExistingCluster`. See [Issue-1239]. |

> | **`members_removed` bucket** | A boltdb bucket in the etcd data directory used to record removed member IDs. `etcd-backup-restore` reads it during initialization to detect whether the local member ID was permanently removed and prevent re-adding it as a learner. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **`members_removed` bucket** | A boltdb bucket in the etcd data directory which record removed member IDs.  |
```
terminology definition shouldn't contain more than required details like how and who is going to use it.

---

## Motivation

> Scale-down is relevant for three cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scale-down is relevant for two cases:
```

1. **Typical scale-down.** A consumer reduces `spec.replicas` (for example, 3→1). This is a capacity-management feature and can also support operational workflows such as zero-downtime upgrades of a normally non-HA cluster: temporarily scale the cluster out, introduce upgraded replacement members, then scale back down after the upgraded member is healthy. The excess members need to be removed from etcd before their pods are terminated. Today this update is rejected at admission time.

> 1. **Scale-down after live migration.** When an Etcd CR bootstraps its members into an existing cluster via `bootstrapWithExistingCluster` ([Issue-1239]), the original cluster's members eventually need to be removed so that the new cluster operates independently. Without a removal mechanism in etcd-druid, this pruning step has to be performed separately after live migration.

Reviewer: I think you should also define `live-migration` in terminology.

> [!NOTE]
> These capabilities are consumed by higher-level orchestrators — for example, Gardener's Live Control Plane Migration ([GEP-0039]). The GEP (Gardener Enhancement Proposal) defines a concrete scale-down implementation; this DEP defines one for etcd-druid.

## Goals

1. Enable scale-down of etcd clusters by implementing coordinated member removal and removing the CEL validation that currently blocks it.
2. Ensure member removal completes **before** etcd-druid reconciles resources in a way that removes member runtime instances, reducing the risk of split-brain or quorum loss.

> 3. Provide a unified mechanism to remove one or more etcd members from a running cluster, usable across all three scale-down scenarios.

Reviewer 2: There are other occurrences also, please adapt it to two at other places.
```suggestion
3. Provide a unified mechanism to remove one or more etcd members from a running cluster, usable across all two scale-down scenarios.
```

4. Detect removed members in `etcd-backup-restore` to prevent re-adding them as learners.
5. Integrate with the existing EtcdOpsTask lifecycle (state machine, duplicate prevention, TTL-based garbage collection).
6. Support both TLS-enabled and plaintext etcd clusters.
7. Ensure idempotent behavior — removing an already-absent member is a no-op.

## Non-Goals

> 1. **Automatic leader transfer.** No explicit `MoveLeader` RPC is issued before removing the leader. Member removal uses etcd's `MemberRemove` flow and lets raft membership changes/election happen according to etcd's existing behavior ([EtcdRemoveMember]).

Reviewer 2: Usually, how much time does it take to re-elect the leader? Can it be very long, leading to significant downtime?

2. **Quorum recovery.** If removal causes quorum loss, recovery is handled by the existing QuorumRecovery OpsTask — not this mechanism.
3. **Scale-down to zero.** Hibernation (`replicas=0`) is a separate path with its own pre-sync snapshot and is already supported.

---

## Proposal

### Prerequisites

> - The etcd cluster is expected to be healthy (`EtcdReady` condition is `True`) before scale-down is attempted.

Reviewer: do `EtcdReady` condition consider all members of cluster to be ready or it consider only cluster members created by this etcd resource to be ready ?

> - The resulting cluster after scale-down needs to retain quorum — at least `(N/2)+1` members must remain. Scaling a 3-member cluster to 1 member is valid (1 remaining member forms a single-node quorum).

Reviewer 2: Can you please explain more about this?  What happens when one tries to remove only one member from the cluster of 3? Will there be validation that will fail?
What N stands here for, the count of members at the very start, or the count of members after the scale down?

- [DEP-05] needs to be implemented — the RemoveMembers task type extends this framework.
- For the live migration case: [Issue-1239] (`bootstrapWithExistingCluster`) needs to be implemented.

### Approach

Scale-down is orchestrated by etcd-druid through the [EtcdOpsTask][DEP-05] framework, following a "remove-before-terminate" invariant.

It aims to achieve coordinated scale-down by:

> 1. Implementing the `RemoveMembers` OpsTask that internally deploys a Kubernetes Job running `etcdbrctl member-remove`, which sequentially removes members with health checks between each removal.

Reviewer: why we need one more sub-command just to remove a member from a cluster.

1. Detecting scale-down intent in the reconciler's PreSync phase and creating the `RemoveMembers` OpsTask that pauses further reconciliation until members are removed from etcd.
1. Preventing removed members from re-joining via `etcd-backup-restore`'s boltdb-based detection during initialization.
1. Removing the CEL admission rule that blocks decreasing `spec.replicas` once the PreSync mechanism enforces removal-before-termination ordering.

The execution path is:

```
spec.replicas decreased → PreSync detects → OpsTask created → Job removes members from etcd
    → Post-removal cleanup (per use case) → Regular reconciliation continues

> ```

Reviewer: I'm not in favour of using the ops-task for member removal for following reasons:
1. Ops-task a.k.a operator-task is meant to be only for `out-of-band` tasks i.e those tasks which runs outside the regular etcd reconciliation flow and which can help the operator, check the motivation of ops-task DEP: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-druid/blob/master/docs/proposals/05-etcdopstask.md#motivation
```
It has been observed that we regularly need capabilities to trigger out-of-band tasks which are outside of the purview of a regular etcd reconciliation run.
```
2. Even if I make the exception for this `member-removal` task and let it be done via ops-task then other features would also like to outsource the heavy lifting tasks to ops-task, and because of this after sometime ops-task will no longer be the one for which it was created.

cc @unmarshall @shreyas-s-rao

After the `RemoveMembers` OpsTask succeeds:
1. **Typical scale-down**: Delete PVCs for removed ordinals.
1. **Scale-down after live migration**: Update `status.bootstrapWithExistingCluster` and set condition `BootstrapWithExistingCluster` to `False`.

Then the regular reconciliation loop continues. For etcd-druid-managed members, ConfigMap is regenerated, StatefulSet is updated based on `etcd.Spec.Replicas`, and the StatefulSet controller terminates pods for the reduced replica count.

This ordering is intended to ensure that member runtime instances are not removed while still holding etcd membership.

> All three use cases share the same OpsTask→Job→etcdbrctl path. They differ in trigger condition and post-removal cleanup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All two use cases share the same OpsTask→Job→etcdbrctl path. They differ in trigger condition and post-removal cleanup.
```

1. **Set to `False`** at the end of reconciliation after Sync completes successfully and all members are healthy.

This gives consumers an admission rejection rather than a requeue loop when attempting conflicting operations.

### Scale-Down Execution

#### RemoveMembers EtcdOpsTask

A `RemoveMembers` field is added to `EtcdOpsTaskConfig`. Each entry specifies a member name and its peer URL. Members are removed one at a time with a 5-second stabilization interval and health check between each removal. If a member is already absent from the cluster's `MemberList()`, it is skipped (idempotent).

**`RemoveMembersConfig`**

```go
type RemoveMembersConfig struct {
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
    MembersToRemove []MemberToRemove `json:"membersToRemove"`
}

type MemberToRemove struct {
    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1

>     Name string `json:"name"`

Reviewer: it should have memberID not memberName.

    // +kubebuilder:validation:Required
    // +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
    PeerURL string `json:"peerUrl"`
}
```

**Example EtcdOpsTask**

```yaml
apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: EtcdOpsTask
metadata:
  name: remove-members-etcd-main

>   namespace: shoot--myproject--mycluster

Reviewer 2: Don't mention gardener specific details here, same for other occurrences 
```suggestion
  namespace: myproject--mycluster
```

| `--cacert` | String | CA bundle to verify TLS servers |
| `--cert` | String | TLS client certificate file |
| `--key` | String | TLS client key file |
| `--insecure-transport` | Bool | Disable transport security (for non-TLS clusters) |

```
etcdbrctl member-remove \
  --member=etcd-main-1=https://etcd-main-1.etcd-main-peer.shoot--myproject--mycluster.svc:2380 \
  --member=etcd-main-2=https://etcd-main-2.etcd-main-peer.shoot--myproject--mycluster.svc:2380 \
  --endpoints=https://etcd-main-client.shoot--myproject--mycluster.svc:2379 \
  --cacert=/var/etcd/ssl/ca/bundle.crt \
  --cert=/var/etcd/ssl/client/tls.crt \
  --key=/var/etcd/ssl/client/tls.key
```

**Algorithm:**

1. Parse `--member` flags into a list of `(name, peerURL)` pairs.
1. Connect to the etcd cluster using `--endpoints` and TLS credentials.
1. Call `MemberList()` to retrieve current cluster members.
1. For each member in the provided list:
   - a. Match peerURL to find the member ID. If not found, log and skip (idempotent).
   - b. If the member is a learner, remove directly — learner removal does not affect quorum.
   - c. Call `MemberRemove(memberID)`.
   - d. Wait 5 seconds for cluster stabilization.

>    - e. Health-check remaining members. If fewer than `(N/2)+1` are healthy, exit non-zero.

Reviewer 2: This can go wrong since DEP mentions that higher ordinal members will be removed, so in a five member cluster, if `{0,1}` are unhealthy, it will remove member `5` since it will think `(N/2)+1`  members are healthy. Leading to quorum loss, which is not correct thing to do.

The post-removal cleanup differs by use case:

| Use case | Post-removal action |
|----------|---------------------|
| Typical scale-down | Delete PVCs for removed ordinals, scale StatefulSet to new replica count. |
| Scale-down after live migration | Clear `status.bootstrapWithExistingCluster.joinedWith`, set condition `BootstrapWithExistingCluster` to `False`. |

### Anti-Rejoin Detection in backup-restore

#### Detection via boltdb bucket

After scale-down removes a member from the cluster, `etcd-backup-restore` on the scaled-down member's pod needs to detect this and avoid re-adding itself as a learner. Without this detection, the pod — which may still be running during graceful termination or if PVC persists — could undo the scale-down by re-joining. The detection runs during initialization **before** the scale-up check in the existing initializer flow ([InitializerFlow]).

> The detection should not be based on pod name. In etcd's backend, the `members` and `members_removed` buckets are keyed by etcd member ID, not Kubernetes pod name. When etcd applies a member removal, it writes the removed member ID into the `members_removed` bucket and deletes the same ID from the `members` bucket ([EtcdMembershipStore]). Therefore, checking that "pod name is absent from `members`" would not identify the removed local member reliably.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The detection should not be based on member name. In etcd's backend, the `members` and `members_removed` buckets are keyed by etcd member ID, not etcd member name. When etcd applies a member removal, it writes the removed member ID into the `members_removed` bucket and deletes the same ID from the `members` bucket ([EtcdMembershipStore]). Therefore, checking that "pod name is absent from `members`" would not identify the removed local member reliably.
```
let's write memberName which can be calculated via member-prefix(optional) + podName.

**Detection via local member ID (`IsLocalMemberRemovedFromDB`).** A feasible check is:

> 1. Read the local etcd member ID from the WAL metadata in `dataDir/member/wal`. etcd writes this metadata when creating the WAL: `pb.Metadata{NodeID: uint64(member.ID), ClusterID: uint64(cluster.ID)}` ([EtcdWALMetadata]).

Reviewer: Instead of this why not backup-restore can create a marker file with `memberID` in it while bootstrapping, it may also be helpful in removing the member-lease dependency , wdyt ?
